Well, as I say in the book, he introduced himself to me during a religious service on a Friday evening, and I couldn't believe that this very gentle, so-spoken person could be...
could be incarcerated.
And then when I heard the nature of his crime and read that article and spoke to him at length about it, I was convinced that this man is in definite need of mental treatment.
And then he did things while he was in prison.
Yeah, there were incidents.
He got in one fight.
He was beaten up rather badly.
And he was in the general population in a four-man cell, even though they had a mental health unit right next door.
And he seemed to gravitate in finding his friends in the mental health unit, you know, where he belonged, under treatment.
Very sad case.
Now, you see what bothers me?
I give talks.
I give a lot of talks.
And, you know, he committed crimes.
I asked him a question.
It may even be in the book.
I think it's in the book.
I said, Stephen, how many crimes do you think you've committed in your lifetime?
He said, felonies are misdemeanors.
He's pretty cute.
You know, take a pick.
And the amazing thing about him is that he doesn't lie.
Right, right, right.
This is our kind of way, he'll tell you, if you ask him a question, he'll tell you, he fought, and he said about 10,000.
And I think you point this out in the book, if you're caught once, you've probably committed two or three hundred crimes that you haven't been caught for.
So, you know, I certainly feel that he should have been, he deserved some form of punishment.
What, seven years?
Stealing books?
Well, that's one of the big problems we have.
And you discussed this in the books here.
You might even use that as a general way of kind of getting into the discussion.
This rage to punish, one of the things that, you know, people ask, why did I write the book?
I think that's why we're getting into this.
Yeah, and I...
I had second thoughts, a lot of second thoughts.
I had no intention of writing a book, but I kept this journal.
It was really for a catharsis.
Really?
No intention whatsoever.
My wife, who's a clinical social worker, pleaded with me to write the book only because of the manic depression part of it.
She thought it was very important that people know, not as an excuse for antisocial behavior or for criminal acts,
And I make it very clear that I never used it as that, ever.
Not then or now.
But just so that people understand it so they can see it in others, they can see it in themselves, and they can get treatment rather than let the thing spin itself out to the point where it becomes very self-destructive.
I don't know if you've ever read K. Jameson's book, An Unquiet Mind.
It's now in paperback.
It just came out.
She wrote a book called Touched With Fire, where she wrote histories of people who've had manic-depressive illness.
Oh, I know the book.
Okay, basic books that you weren't published?
Yes, right.
And then she came out of the closet.
How do you mean she came out of the closet?
Well, she didn't indicate that she was bipolar in her first book.
She came out of the closet in her second book.
in an unquiet mind by telling of her manic depressive illness.
Now here's a woman who's a high-functioning professor of psychology at Johns Hopkins University.
And yet she functioned for years doing bizarre things and finally self-destructive things and finally went over the edge and then went on medication and is living a relatively normal life now.
Were you mindful of your own manic depression?
I was always... The depression, everyone is always mindful of when you have it.
You know it when you have it.
But did you realize it was a clinical case?
Yeah.
You see, my maternal grandmother had committed suicide by cutting her throat with a kitchen knife.
And depression has always been with me, but never...
so profound that eventually I didn't come out of it the manic part of my bipolar disorder has also always been with me but I was never aware of that because when you're manic you feel very good and you feel very productive and you're you feel very intelligent and you can speak very well you can function very well and what happened was and you know
Without excuse, I had an affair, which was inexcusable.
It was a human weakness.
And then when I went into this very deep depression, I started to self-medicate.
And that's what put me into the hyper-manic and then the manic state.
By taking this vast number of drugs, I took some 1,400 of these Tenuate during a limited period, and the Halcyon.
And then started writing these bizarre letters and doing these bizarre things.
I didn't write about some of the bizarre things I did.
But I've written the New York Times.
Yeah, I mean, putting on cowboy hats and going to Linden, New Jersey.
My wife, who didn't see that bizarre edge, did see
The behavior, she has that diary entry where she suspected drugs had pleaded with me to see a doctor and I wouldn't listen.
So she was very anxious for me to write the book because she wanted people to know that it can happen to anyone.
So she saw it as a therapeutic answer.
Exactly, exactly.
And the other part I wrote with respect to prisons and sentencing and so forth, which is really, as the title suggests, what the book is about,
Well, let's talk about the after the madness.
So clearly there was, as you just described it, a period of madness.
Yes, yes.
You definitely call it mental illness.
And it was so diagnosed, not only by the many psychiatrists who treated me before I went to prison, but also when I got into prison.
I was originally scheduled to go to a camp in Pensacola, Florida.
And three days before I left, the Bureau of Prisons, having my medical records, said we want him to go to a prison that has a mental health component.
That has one.
Yeah, that has one, which is Butner, North Carolina, which is where I spent all my time at Butner before I was stabbed, in the mental health unit.
And then after I was stabbed and after the solitary confinement,
They wanted to send me out for my own protection.
And they had to send me to another hospital that had a mental health component, and that was Rochester.
There were only three in the federal system that had mental health units.
Springfield, that's right.
So they sent me to Rochester, where I also went in the mental health unit.
Eventually I was discharged into the general population when they felt they never took me off my medication, but they felt I was in balance and
So you're taking medication?
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
Did you feel that once you had fallen into the hands of these prison officials that they singled you out for any kind of... I think there are three kinds of guards.
It's almost sadistic.
There are three kinds of guards.
And you know which one of the categories they fall in very quickly.
There's the one who thinks that his job or her job is to punish you.
They think, you know, I'm part of the punishment system without recognizing that being sent to prison is the punishment.
The second are the bullies.
They're the worst.
They will come up to you and wash their, what are you sitting on that bench for?
Well, I was tired.
I wanted to sit down.
You don't sit on a bench unless I tell you to sit on a bench.
And if I tell you that's the bench you sit on, I'm sorry.
And I sit on this bench.
And then he says, wait a minute.
Did I tell you you could sit on that bench?
Get your ass off that bench.
I'll throw you in the hole.
This is just, you know, he gets off on this.
And then the third is a decent guard who recognizes his or her responsibility and treats the prisoners like people.
Not that they're easy or soft
But they don't bully you and they don't punish you, which is what a guard should be.
But was I singled out?
I think that the bully guards enjoyed bullying me more than they enjoyed bullying other people.
But I certainly wasn't given a preparatory treatment.
At what point did you realize that there would be a book here and not really a therapeutic exercise?
When I... I'm just checking myself.
I...
I was listening, I tell this in my introduction, but I was listening to a radio talk show, and I listened to those things, although I just can't stand them.
Rush Limbaugh was the one I referred to, and there we talked about, you know, we've got to put two people in a cell, and I was in a cell with three others, saying, what do you know?
But I was listening to a fellow who wrote a book called Criminal Justice, and he was being interviewed.
by a fellow named Bob Grant in New York.
And he started talking about how easy the prisoners have it and how we've got to be tougher on prison owners.
And he didn't know what he was talking about.
And then in the middle of it, he says, and I know what I'm talking about because I visited these prisons.
So Bob Grant says, oh, well, you know, we're talking to an expert.
Yeah.
And that afternoon I had lunch with a fellow named Sam Roberts from the New York Times.
He was editor of the Weekend Review.
And I was, you know, I was angry.
And I said, this is so wrong.
Not because they say this, who cares what they say on a talk show host, but because people hear this and believe it and then urge their politicians to become more repressive and then they become tougher on, they take away more of the abilities to rehabilitate
You know, they cancel lapel grants.
You can't learn anything in prison.
They take away the addiction treatment program.
So you come in as an addict and you go out and you become an addict again.
It's self-defeating.
So I told him this and I told him stories.
He said, you should write this down.
So I said, actually, I have.
I've kept a journal.
He says, can you send me parts of it?
And I sent him part of the journal.
And he printed it.
Now you sent this to whom again?
This was Sam Roberts from the New York Times.
And he printed it in the Week in Review.
And then I received, you know, so many people came to me that I should put this in a book, that it could, you know, have some benefits.
So I met with my family.
And I said, you know, this is going to reopen a lot of rooms.
Things were just starting to quiet down.
People were starting to forget.
Four years had passed.
And they pleaded with me to do it, and I did it.
And it did open the wounds.
And I go to a lot of these interviews, and I want to talk about the book, and they only want to talk about the affair.
Did I ask you a single question about that?
I don't think they had a question.
I said I haven't asked you a single question about that.
No, no, no.
They want to talk about this.
What's going to ask you about this?
Yeah, yeah.
I want to talk about the bipolar disorder, not as an excuse, but I think it's important that people be aware of the fact that it's out there.
And a lot of people have been afflicted by it.
We don't hear about it because not all of them do as Margot Kidder did, you know.
end up in the bushes somewhere, and not all of them end up going to prison by doing anti-social things as I did.
But there are a lot of people.
This doctor at the Payne Whitney, Dr. Miller, told me that he has a hundred cases a year of CEOs, important, prominent, intelligent, functioning, productive people, like Ted Turner, who's bipolar.
Ted Turner?
Yeah, Ted Turner's bipolar.
If Ted Turner didn't take his lithium for a few days, you know, this book by Katherine Graham, this recent book.
Which I interviewed her.
Yeah, well, her husband was bipolar.
And I remember Larry King was interviewing her.
And he said, how could he function?
If he was mentally ill.
No, no, no, no, no.
It's interesting.
So now I'm on his show and he says to me, and he says to me, how could you function if you're mentally ill?
I said, you know, you asked the same question, Catherine Graham.
I said, and what she told you, I will tell you.
When you're bipolar, you can function very, very well until.
It goes too far.
I didn't see this.
What was his response to you telling him what somebody has already said?
Yeah.
No, he says, yeah, he was editor of the Washington Post.
Like that made the point.
Like I remember.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I know who he was.
What are you trying to tell me I'm not smart?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, just look at that situation.
He came home.
They were talking...
And then he said, I'm going to go take a nap.
And a few days beforehand, she writes how he made a speech that was, you know... Brilliant.
Brilliant.
And then another one which is babbling.
And, you know, the funny thing is that all about a month before I was arrested, I was asked to speak to a group of teachers on the Constitution.
And it suddenly occurred to me
But they didn't really want to hear that speech.
I knew better.
They wanted to hear a speech about some arcane legal doctrine, Reyes Judicata.
No, not Reyes, Reyes Ipsilocator.
And so I went out there and I delivered this speech on Reyes Ipsilocator.
And they all applauded.
The chief judge, speaking to them, must be smart what I said, right?
And I went over to my assistant and said, what was that all about?
And I said, you know, it shows you how slow you are.
They knew.
I knew.
Why can't you know?
This is what they wanted to hear.
They didn't want to hear about the Constitution.
And, you know, things like that.
I've often said, and I say in the book, I wish I'd been arrested sooner.
You also say that there's a suggestion there that they...
They were waiting for you to do something more serious.
Oh, no question about it.
How do you feel about that?
I think it was wrong.
In your case or in general?
In general.
You see, what's happened is, and I note the fact that district attorneys are elected in most areas and U.S.
attorneys are appointed.
It's very important for them to maintain a high profile, either to be re-elected or to be reappointed, or if they're not reappointed, to go on to something else that's productive, which was the case of my U.S.
attorney.
He knew this crime was committed, or I was arrested, right before the election.
Excuse me, right after the election.
Right after the election.
Bush was not re-elected, so he wasn't going to be reappointed.
He had to make a great reputation real quick.
Did he get reappointed?
No.
But he got to stay on along with any other U.S.
attorney in the country because he kept saying, I have to prosecute this case.
And then after it was over, he was given an appointment by the Republican senators, by Aldermano, to...
to conduct the Whitewater hearings.
So he, you know, he built a great reputation on this.
Oh, yes.
Oh, there's no question.
The FBI is the U.S.
attorneys, at least there was in this instance, and I've been in touch with the present director of the FBI to tell that this is something that should be stopped if it still goes on.
In every case, though, I mean, what if you're really trying to make a case on some drug dealers or career criminals?
Maybe you have knowledge that they're going to do something, but you could arrest them on something lesser at this particular point.
No, no, no.
Depends on the crime.
If, in my case, I was acting alone,
They knew that.
They had been following me for over a month.
They knew it was me.
They took a telephone off the wall, a public phone that had my fingerprints on me.
They had everything.
They wired her apartment and were feeding her lines for me to, you know,
The way they finally got me on the big thing was... Whenever I say this, it sounds like I'm blaming someone else.
I'm raising it as an issue.
It's interesting because there's a dialogue.
I call up and I say, I'm a very sick man.
I'm trying to be this other person.
As if she knew it was me, I figured.
And of course she knows it's me.
By this time, there's an absolute doubt it's me because I've been under surveillance.
And I had a voice changing machine that wasn't working.
So she's listening to the same voice she heard for eight years.
Every day.
We used to speak so many, four or five times a day.
You didn't ever pull?
No, I was, no.
No, I mean, it was just, you see, your judgment becomes so skewed.
So I'm talking to her, and I'm saying, I'm a very sick man, and then she says, what do you want to leave me alone?
She said?
Yeah.
So I said, you don't understand something.
She said, what do you want?
How much money do you want for me to leave me alone?
So I said, $200,000.
So then I said, wait a minute, that's asking for too much.
I said, $20,000.
And then she says, and if I pay you, will you leave me alone?
I said, yes, but I don't want to talk about that.
I want to tell you about the fact that I'm wearing a diaper and I'm stuck in two yards.
And then she says, what will you do with my child?
I never mention her child.
And I said, it's almost like you're being sent up here for extortion.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
And if she had asked me,
Will you murder someone?
I would have said yes, I know anything.
So now they get all this and they let me keep on for another 10 days.
No, excuse me.
No, this was one of the first calls.
They could have nailed you right there.
Oh, they could have nailed me the very first day because I was harassing her for harassment.
So now...
That would have ruined your career, though, even at... Yeah, well, you know... I mean, even at the first, that would have done it.
I remember when I was in the military police, we had a captain who was misbehaving terribly.
And I went to him.
His name was Pfeiffer.
And I said, Captain, you've done this, that, and the other thing.
We could arrest you for this.
You could be court-martialed.
You could be sent away for 10 years.
Resign for the good of the service.
And forget about it.
And get yourself treated.
And he did.
And was.
And that was the end of it.
The reason, and this is an interesting thing, Nick, the reason that Joy, this woman, took all these letters that I'd sent and got on a plane and flew to Bill Sessions, who was her friend,
And he then calls the U.S.
attorney in New Jersey.
Now, mind you, I'm from New York.
The victim is from New York.
Everything is done in New York.
But one card was sent from New Jersey, and so that gave New Jersey a nexus.
So he calls up the U.S.
attorney in New Jersey.
The U.S.
attorney in New Jersey never...
spoke to the U.S.
attorney in New York, never spoke to the FBI in New York.
And the reason was that I knew the U.S.
attorneys in New York, they would have come to me, or if they were merciful, they would have arrested me.
In any event, my career was over.
But instead, the U.S.
attorney in New Jersey, using the FBI as his private army, and according to the press reports, it was between 80 and 100 agents,
following all over the country.
Yeah.
For one month.
Oh, it's a terrible thing.
No.
This is something I've told no one else.
Between you and me, you swear?
You swear?
Yeah.
Okay.
At the same time as they were on surveillance of me,
They had no surveillance on the mosque in Jersey City, although they knew that Rachman, who was on a wanted list and a watch list, was there, that Yusuf had come in with a false passport and he was there, that all the meetings were being held in the Jersey City mosque cooking up the World Trade Center.
It happened just during that month that they were there.
And they said, why didn't anyone see this?
Because the Egyptian ambassador told them to watch Rahman and watch the mosque because he tried to assassinate Mubarak.
So he was someone to watch.
And then Yusuf came in with a false passport and sought political asylum and went to live in a building right next door to the mosque.
And then they converted over $100,000 during this process, laundered it to buy the material, and they were all chasing this nut.
But it was a wonderful high profile.
And then, and this is from his own account, the U.S.
Attorney's own account, they wanted me to pick up this money.
Well, I wasn't going to pick up the money.
I didn't even, you know...
And so I'm on my way home from Albany.
See, then they would have had a heavier charge.
Oh, God, then they would have had me for extortion.
All these things, which really would have made it.
Sure.
I'm not saying it's not a legitimate case.
No, no, sure.
Serious stuff.
So then I'm driving home, and then you talk about normal police work.
Now, I was in the military police, and I know that you never apprehend a felon
unless he's on a warrant notice and he's fleeing, or he's on his way to commit a crime, or he's returning from a crime, or he's armed and dangerous.
Otherwise, you have him self-surrender, or you arrest him at home.
Not on the highway.
And there was the Long Island Express, there were 1 o'clock in the afternoon.
Well, things are going to happen, as they often do.
Like?
Well, I mean, I mean...
You could have started a high-speed chase.
People could have been killed.
Oh, I'll tell you, you know, the funny thing is I thought they were terrorists.
Is that right?
Yeah, and so, you know, I quickly, you know, locked my doors, and then they slapped the badge against the window, because we were told, you know, all the high-profile
Public officials were always told that you're always in danger of and you have to be careful of.
But I've never carried a weapon since... You know, what I'm saying is instead of waiting for you to go home as they could have... I was five minutes away.
The next exit.
Even waiting until I got on my quiet street.
I wonder what the traffic says.
Why did they decide to do it right there?
I mean, the radio traffic.
Well, the New Jersey Law Journal said that the U.S.
Attorney made a circus of this.
The New York Post read an editorial which criticized this.
But it was obviously done because it would make the primetime news that evening.
Page one of the New York Times.
Yeah, above the center point.
Above the fold.
Yeah.
Look, that's irrelevant.
That's all irrelevant.
It really is.
And the... If I wanted to accomplish anything negative in this book, it was to criticize, which I did, the U.S.
Attorney for Handling's.
It's after the fact, but...
People shouldn't do this and get away with it.
Not to me, not to you, not to anyone else.
So let's talk a few issues now then, too.
Really, I mean, as much as anyone, I don't know if any other judges of your stature have had to go through this.
Fortunately not.
but you really have had an opportunity quite dramatically to see the justice system from both sides.
I mean, that is a unique perspective, wouldn't you say?
Oh, yes, it is.
It's a vantage point.
That's one.
You've had two vantage points.
It's a word for the honor, you know.
I just assume not a bad issue.
Well, I agree.
It pains me to question you.
I'd much rather be calling you governor.
Yeah, thank you.
Which would have...
may well have come to pass.
Who knows?
Well, or I also could have killed myself, which is where I was going.
You think?
Oh, yeah.
Let's say, had they not picked up on this, and had you come to your senses and deceased from what you were doing, what do you think would have happened?
Do you think you were still heading for a tragic end?
There were so many times when I did something like this, and I said, I don't want to do that anymore.
That's finished.
And then,
my mind would start going, do you know how sometimes you have this crazy thought at night right before you go to sleep, and then you get up in the morning and you remember it and you think how crazy it was?
It's silly, but also scary.
Yeah, well, when I had those thoughts at night, I'd get up in the morning and I'd think they were twice as brilliant as I did the night before.
That's what happened.
I said, God...
That was incredibly brilliant.
I'd say it's sad.
That sounds self-serving.
But it's sad because I don't have it.
I don't have it now.
And I just pity those who live with this now.
And there are hundreds out there who do and could be treated.
And that's very sad.
Do you think you wanted to be governor?
Yes.
You weren't secretly trying to undermine your own
No, no, I really did want to be governor, very much, and I thought I could be a good governor, I had some wonderful ideas, and it just wasn't going to be.
I think that as soon as I was treated, though, I could never have gone any further.
Although the psychiatrist at Payne Whitney said, if your focus had been on campaigning and your manic energy set to develop in that direction, you could have been President of the United States.
I had one story.
I didn't tell this in the book, but you reminded me of it.
When I was in the Payne Whitney, some young intern, a psychiatric intern, came over and started interviewing him.
And he didn't know who I was or what I was.
And I started telling him that I was the chief judge of New York and that I could have... Yeah, yeah.
And he said, that's interesting.
And he says, were you going to go to any other office?
I said, well, I was thinking of running for governor.
And he said, and did you ever think of... Can I use this story?
Yeah, yes, sure.
Sure, it's a true story.
And then he said, did you ever think of running for president?
And I said...
I'm sorry.
And then suddenly it dawned on me that, you know, what was going on.
And I said, no, I said, I'm very serious.
He says, I know you're very serious.
I just want to know whether you are very serious about running for president.
So then I realized that, you know, I said, I just, I'm thinking about running for governor.
And then I just.
Who is this?
Payne Whitney.
Payne Whitney, which is part of Cornell Medical School.
And this guy didn't know any work?
No, no, no.
He was just doing rounds, you know, and just saying how you're feeling, you know.
And if you ever thought that you might like to be Pope.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, you know, that sounds reasonable.
And I'm sure that he had this from a lot of people as he went around, you know, who were having schizophrenic episodes.
But it seems you have a sense of humor, right?
Oh, God.
I mean, it's morbid, but does it have a sense of humor?
If you can't laugh at this, you know, my family will sit around and we'll talk and I'll say something and then one of my daughters will say, uh-oh.
Dad's going to go get the cowboy hat again.
So you've got to laugh.
You just cry all the time.
You know, it's an interesting time that we're in.
In terms of 20 years ago, it would have been a groundswell of 25 years of support, interest, sympathy for prisoners,
rights or whatever you want to call it, the welfare, but not today.
Gone just the opposite.
And, you know... Just the opposite.
What do you think the public attitude should be?
Taking into account, of course, you know, our concern about crime.
That's it.
You see, what's happened is the public has tended, and this is something that I guess I was guilty of this as well.
I just never focused until I was there to
We tend to lump prisoners together.
We don't draw the distinction between violent and nonviolent, between those people who can be rehabilitated and those who cannot be.
We tend to think in terms of rehabilitation has failed.
Well, rehabilitation has failed when it comes to the sociopaths and the
hard, violent criminals.
And that's all we used to have in prison at one time.
At one time, that was your prison population.
You couldn't rehabilitate them.
Now our prison population has grown beyond measure, and 70% or more are of a different kind entirely who can be rehabilitated.
But you go to someone, in fact, if you had gone to me,
six, seven years ago, I would have said to you, rehabilitation just hasn't worked.
This hasn't worked.
And it didn't work on the population of that time.
But now, as I say, we have an entirely different population.
In this country where we have, for every 100,000 in our population, we have 500 people behind bars.
Compare that to England, which has 95, or Japan, which has 45.
We have 500.
So that...
We look at these people.
Do we have more crime, or do we just have much more severe crime?
No, no, no.
It's the drug, the war on drugs.
Now, the war on drugs has not been won, okay?
Drug use today is the same as it's always been.
And you keep locking them up and keep locking them up for longer and longer terms.
Every time you lock up a drug dealer, another one is going to take his place, or two more will take his place.
So you say, well, wait a minute.
I was with the Babe Buchanan the other day on her television show, and after it was over, she said, you know, it seems to me that even though we're locking up an awful lot of people, crime has gone down in the cities.
That's gone down.
Yeah.
And I think that's why.
And that becomes now the mythology.
Not so at all.
It has no relationship to that, and that's been shown.
The reason crime has gone down are two
One is increased police patrol and increased police presence.
More police officers and better deployment.
That's been done in all the major cities.
And the second reason, and a huge reason, is the drug of choice has changed.
In the book I tell about, one of the prisoners tell me about the fact that there were 80,000 poppy growers in Afghanistan
who during the Afghanistan war went to Pakistan.
And then when the, that was in 85, and that's when crack became the drug of choice.
And that's when the drug epidemic, the crack epidemic began.
That's when people were committing crimes of great violence.
Then when the Afghanistan war was over in the early 90s, the poppy growers came back and they started growing poppy.
poppies again, and heroin flooded into this country.
Enormous amounts of heroin.
And in the inner cities today, you don't hear about crack being used that much.
It's been minimized.
Heroin is now being used.
Does this contribute to less violent crime?
Absolutely.
Why?
Because heroin puts people on the nod.
They commit the crimes to get the money to get the heroin.
When they take the heroin, they go to sleep.
When you commit the crime to get the money to buy crack, you take the crack, you go out and break someone's head.
So they say, Jesus, the murder rates in the inner city area has dropped tremendously.
The murder rate has dropped tremendously in the inner cities.
Why?
Because the inner city kids are not using the crack that they used before.
And it'll probably even diminish more in the months to come.
But
This they told me, and this I believe.
There's another drug coming in from the coast called Crank, which is made with homegrown products.
Sudafed out of the drugstore, and the appetite depressant has a drug called PPM.
Walmart just said you can't buy all this.
Did you see the other thing?
No.
Walmart made a decision that you can no longer buy things like Sudafed in bulk.
Oh, really?
Good for them.
Because it's been demonstrated to them that
These materials are being bought in great volume.
They're being used to manufacture... Crank, which is a methamphetamine.
And crank is coming in again from the West Coast.
When that gets here, which will be the summer after next, you're going to see the crime rate go up again because that's another drug of violence.
So, not a happy prediction.
But the fact is that locking up these...
low-level drug dealers is not working.
The other thing that I found very, very interesting, and this is a revelation to me that I have in the book.
I don't know if it will be to anyone else.
You have time.
I have time.
Good.
The conspiracy laws.
What they try to accomplish, they have these sentencing guidelines which are really draconian.
But what they say is, look, we can't get these kingpins because they don't touch the drugs.
They don't come near the drugs.
They don't sell the drugs.
So how do we get them?
Well, the way we're going to get them is we're going to get the low-level dealer.
And when I say the low-level dealer, we're going to put you away for 10 years under the sentencing guidelines if you're convicted because you had 3 kilos with you.
That's ten years, and that's how long you're going to go away.
But if you give us the name of the kingpin and testify against the kingpin, we'll let you go home.
So the guy says, fine.
And he does it.
And then he gets what they call a K-1 letter, which means you cooperate with the prosecutor and get out of jail free.
Okay?
Now they go after the kingpin.
And they grab the kingpin.
And the kingpin says, please.
I have 50 people working for me.
I'll give you all 50 of them.
Testify against them.
Put them all 50 away.
I want a K-1 letter.
And the prosecutors are giving it to them.
Why?
Because, again, the publicity of arresting 50 members of a drug ring is far better than knocking off one big guy.
So they give the kingpin the K1 letter.
Then they go out and they arrest the 50 guys.
This is what happened with Nicky Barnes.
I don't know if you've ever heard the name Nicky Barnes.
Nicky Barnes was the biggest drug deal in the Northeast.
He's home.
But the people that weren't for Nicky Barnes, I was in prison.
One was serving a 70-year sentence.
Because when they get the 50, the 50 say, wait a minute, I'll give up.
I'll tell you who the one is.
We don't need you.
We got everyone.
Yeah, but give me I want a K-1.
You've got nothing.
You're going away for the full time.
I've got a couple of questions.
Sure, I'm sorry.
No, that's fine.
This is all excellent.
I'm going to use general questions, but what was your reputation as a judge?
Were you a hard-ass... No, I was considered a middle-of-the-road judge, but in certain areas I was considered more conservative than other judges.
I was...
very, very tough on violent evidence, very tough, but not, thank goodness, on first-time drug arrests.
I wrote a dissent with respect to the enforcement of the Rockefeller drug laws, although I have to tell you that when Nelson Rockefeller spoke to me about those drug laws back in the 1972
I was very much in favor.
I thought, by God, this will stop it.
You know, an ounce of cocaine, life without parole.
Fantastic idea.
A couple poor people will go away for a long time, but no one's going to touch drugs.
Look at Singapore, you know, the old conventional wisdom.
Well, the Rockefeller drug laws were put in place.
They were modified somewhat, but they're still extraordinary.
And I wrote a dissent saying that they're barbaric.
There was a case that came through our court not too long ago where a young woman, 17 years old, was delivering.
She was a mule.
She was delivering some narcotics to her.
She was delivering it to a narcotics agent, but she got a 15-year mandatory sentence, which she's now served.
No sentence.
Oh, I would be more of an activist judge.
Instead of merely grumbling to my colleagues about the sentencing guidelines and about the conditions in prison with respect to no rehabilitation, no education, no drug treatment, I would be on the stump.
Which I intend to do anyhow, but I would have been far more credible as a judge than as a next con.
So, boy, what a thing do you want to say at one stage when you judge it as opposed to the next con.
You have both of these in your CV now.
I mean, it's an interesting CV, isn't it?
Well, I don't really...
mention that in my CV, because I figured that I would notice it.
Well, I was an activist, and I know I went through an experience with my book, and I won't bore you with it, but I was more offended by randomness, as a matter of fact.
I thought my book would sell, and I spent 60,000 copies in it.
But I went through a year of really very horrible experience of having a contract, and it had been totally digitally contracted, and
Well, that's, you know, this is between you and me.
I, I, I, that's the best thing that ever happened to me.
You got revenge.
That's the best kind of revenge.
Well, this whole publish my book, did it beautifully, and, and, and I'm happy in it.
Oh, it's a highly thought-up book.
It is.
Yeah.
And it was under contract with him.
But, but, the reason I bring this up is a very good point of mind.
Another writer said, you know, Nick, he said, I think through all this, it really helps build your character, in a way.
And,
It does give you, and I wonder if, in a way, this experience for you helped you.
It certainly gave you an outlook.
No, it certainly gave me another... You were no longer living this privileged... But it also, there's also out there an awful lot of people who I victimized.
And I'm not only talking about the victim of a crime, I'm talking about my family, I'm talking about my friends, I'm talking about my court and my profession.
And there's a lot of resentment out there for that, I'm sure.
And I was always, I always prided myself on a good name and a good reputation.
That's been destroyed.
I used to say to my kids, you know, oh, well, you know.
You may be, you know.
A felon.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but you're probably the only prisoner in the history of the public who was visited by a justice in the Supreme Court.
Yeah.
And, you know, is there another case?
In the New York Times book review this week, which I saw, um,
criticizes me for telling that story.
Why?
Because they said I was name dropping.
Yeah, I know.
And I was trying to make... That's one of the most dramatic moments in the... I would have led with that.
I gotta tell you, that... You know, I can't think about that without getting very emotional.
That to me is the most dramatic moment.
Not the arrest, not anything else.
To me, as a writer, if I were writing this book, I probably would have led with that.
You talk about, you know, my God, where am I?
What's happened to my life?
You talk about Franz Kafka looking at this script.
That wouldn't even be the way I write it, isn't it?
You're absolutely right.
This was such a crushing thing, such an emotional thing that
I was before a large audience, and they were asking me about people who visited me in prison.
And I started telling that story, and I started to weep like a baby.
Just thinking about that moment was just... Anyway...
Why would the Times criticize that?
This article is very, very critical.
First of all... This is this coming Sunday?
Yeah, he starts off by saying that he doesn't think it was written in prison.
Well, I think you say at the beginning that you've edited it.
I did.
But you know, it was remarkable.
When they were doing this Dateline show, they asked if they could see the actual journal.
And so I brought out all the letters I'd sent to my daughter.
And I started reading them with this producer.
And by God, there was a lot of stuff that was just absolutely right from there to here.
You can't remember these things.
No, of course not.
I wish I'd kept a diary when I was in the Navy.
Oh, absolutely.
Stuff that's gone forever.
That's right.
For instance, when I read, when I was reading the galleys on the solitary confinement thing, if you put bamboo splints under my fingernails to recall anything that happened to me in solitary confinement, I couldn't do it.
The human mind is wonderful, and
blocking out those kind of unpleasantries.
But I didn't remember anything.
Even as I sit here now, it would be difficult for me to recall, having just read it, recall things that happened to me during those 30 days in the last time.
Because it's just
You just lose it.
So tell me, what do you see in your future?
Well, I have a job.
I finally got a job teaching law at a law school down in Long Island.
That's called Turo.
Good for them.
They took some balls, if you'll excuse my grief.
Well, I tell the story in my epilogue about my one experience where they wanted me to teach and I taught and then they asked me to leave and then
I don't tell a story about another law school where the dean called me up and asked if I would teach, and I told him I would be delighted.
He said, but first I wanted to share it with the faculty, and they had me meet with the faculty, and the faculty signed off on it, and everything was all set.
They had prepared a syllabus, and I was to start in September, and in the middle of August,
I get a call from the board of trustees of the law school who didn't want me to come to work.
And I can understand that, you know.
As you say, it takes balls.
But this law school, I was justit sat on a student petition.
I spoke at the law school, and the students circulate a petition and present it to the dean.
faculty, and they signed off on it, and the Board of Trustees did.
So what did you be teaching?
Appellate Advocacy.
I want to start with that.
I told them I wanted only 20 students in the class to make it a seminar, and they had 175 sign up for it.
So I agreed to expand it to 25, but it can't be any more, you know, just seniors.
Yeah, but it's just going to be the senior law students, just to
That'll be good.
And this book is closure.
This puts that behind me.
But I intend to work very, very hard and speak on the issues.
So the book is closure for you?
Yeah.
Is it a catharsis for you?
Does the book perform that function for you?
Yeah, because I think I said what I wanted to say.
I think I made the points I wanted to make.
and it gives me a platform for which to speak.
If people would listen to me,
which some do, on national public radio, they would be fabulous.
But when it comes to Larry King, tell me, if Joyce Sullivan was here now, what would you say to her?
And what would she say to you?
And I kept saying, we would have nothing to say to her.
Well, you know, didn't you ever fail?
Yeah, because all of Joyce Sullivan was here now, and it's all over, and maybe we'll go out on a date.
That's embarrassing.
That embarrasses me just to hear it.
Just hopeful.
So, you know, that's the unwelcome stuff.
Do you still have a deep abiding faith in the system?
Oh, yes.
The system really, did the system screw up in your case?
No, no.
I think I have a great, but the system has to be fine-tuned when it comes to certain things and certainly has to be completely changed when it comes to mandatory sentences.
This is the 10th anniversary of the federal guidelines.
Nine out of every 10
Federal judges say that it brings injustice to our justice system.
Injustice.
You cannot have the legislature.
Nine out of every ten federal judges.
You can't have the legislature in the states and in the federal government, Congress,
deciding how people should be sentenced.
And of course, it's all reflecting political attitudes.
Absolutely.
The recurrence of opinion.
Yeah, exactly.
It's like looking at the polls and saying, hey, if we really strengthen the law against... Right, right.
Sent away for 20 years.
Can you imagine some politician getting up saying, I think that we should reduce...
the amount of time a person serves for a first-time drug possession?
Cut it down from 10 to 5 years?
Well, Louis Lent got sentenced today.
I just turned it on the way in.
You know, the fellow who killed the woman girl, Sarah Edwards.
And the judge in New York said, I wish I had the death penalty at my disposal.
And I don't.
So he gave the 25 to life.
But first he serves time here.
You know, uh...
I don't think you're suggesting discretion.
I mean, I think the judge quite correctly gave the maximum... I think a judge should be given discretion to go very, very high because you always have an appellate corner that's excessive to cut it down.
But I don't think that a judge has to be... For example, two fellows have a barroom board.
The one left standing, the winner...
is arrested for assault.
Another fellow goes out and jumps on a poor old lady and beats the hell out of her.
He's arrested for assault.
Same crime, same punishment.
A woman... And this guy might have even been, you know, the other guy, the guy that's down might have started the fight.
That's right, absolutely.
This guy might have been defending himself.
Absolutely, absolutely.
But because he won the fight, he's guilty himself.
And that's why I'm against the mandatory three strikes you're out rule.
Because...
because a judge should be able to look behind the fact.
Now, you've convicted that fellow standing in the barroom brawl.
You've convicted him, and it turns out he had two other felonies.
He had a shop, he stole from someone, and he stole a car or something.
And now there's this third felony, life in prison.
Well, you know...
He's a bad guy.
He shouldn't have been in that bar.
But he didn't start it.
So you want to put him away for five years?
What's the word they use?
Men's rea?
Intent?
Intent.
It's a common word that's used.
But you know, just assuming the crimes.
A woman steals powdered milk.
Oh, sure.
A woman steals powdered milk to feed her baby.
Another fellow steals powdered milk to cut heroin.
Same substance, same crime, same punishment.
A judge has to go in there and say, the legislature says that stealing a substance is punishable by X. Therefore, I have to give you X.
So we need a little bit of discretion here.
Exactly, exactly.
And common sense, I think, too.
Let me give you my pen.
Wait, if I can't have the jacket on.
Is this right?
Yeah.
Sorry.
Let me give you a decent pen.
I'm the collector here, you know.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, thank you.
I'm just saying some books down in Washington.
You don't seem to
My brother used to tell me, my older brother when I was growing up, that anyone who seeks revenge has to dig two graves and that you can't do that.
You've got to leave those things behind you.
You can't have any bitterness or grudges or anything else.
Go ahead and look forward.
Yeah, and one of the things I get out of your book is, I mean, two things.
First of all, yes, you are for certain forms of sentencing.
I don't think you're looking for any kind of wholesale prison reform on the one hand, but on the other, you take full responsibility for your actions.
Absolutely.
You're not blaming anybody else.
No, and nor should I, because
And I think that's very important to point out.
You did what you did.
I'm also not going to keep the proceeds from this book.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
I've started an organization called CADRE, I mentioned it in the episode, which is an alternative dispute resolution.
And all the profits go to provide legal services for the poor.
And all the proceeds from this book go into the CADRE operation so that it can be
Go bigger and better and more productive.
Do you plan any more books?
Yes, I'll tell you all the rest.
I started it.